Added hygraph cms integration (#3520)
withastro/docs: src/content/docs/en/guides/cms/hygraph.mdx

---
title: Hygraph & Astro
description: Add content to your Astro project using Hygraph as a CMS
type: cms
service: Hygraph
i18nReady: true
---
import FileTree from '~/components/FileTree.astro'

> [Hygraph](https://hygraph.com/) is a federated content management platform. It uses a simple GraphQL endpoint for fast distribution of content.

Reviewer: I've updated the language to be more neutral, and highlight the way the user fetches content.
```suggestion
[Hygraph](https://hygraph.com/) is a federated content management platform. It exposes a GraphQL endpoint for fetching content.
```

## Integrating with Astro

In this section, you'll create a [Hygraph](https://hygraph.com/) GraphQL endpoint to fetch with Astro.

### Prerequisites

To get started, you will need to have the following:

1. **A Hygraph account and a Hygraph project**. If you don't have an account, you can [sign up](https://app.hygraph.com/signup) for a free account and create a new Hygraph project. You can also use an existing project if you have one. 

> 2. **Hygraph access permissions** - You can configure public Content API access permissions for requests from any website in **Project Settings > API Access**. If you don't have any permission setted, it's gonna ask you to **initialize some defaults** click on the **Yes, initialize defaults** button. Now you can use the different GraphQL endpoints

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. **Hygraph access permissions** - In `Project Settings > API Access`, configure Public Content API permissions to allow read requests without authentication. If you haven't set any permissions, you can click **Yes, initialize defaults** to add the required permissions to use the "High Performance Content API".
```

> 
>     - **Content API** - For read and write operations. 
>     - **High Performance Read-only Content API** - For low latency queries, but no mutations.
>     - **Asset Upload API** - For asset uploading from your filesystem. For this to work, you'll a **Permanent Auth Token** with **Mutations**.
>     - **Management API** - This API handles all structural elements of a project, which can be utilized through the [Management SDK](https://hygraph.com/features/developer-operations/management-sdk).
>     
>  In this guide we are gonna work with the **High Performance Read-only Content API**

Reviewer: As we're only using the high-performance content api, we can remove references to the rest.
```suggestion
```

### Setting up the endpoint

To add your Hygraph endpoint to Astro, create a `.env` file in the root of your project with the following variable:

```ini title=".env"
HYGRAPH_ENDPOINT=YOUR_HIGH_PERFORMANCE_API
```

Now, you should be able to use this environment variable in your project. 

> If you would like to have IntelliSense for your Contentful environment variables, you can create a `env.d.ts` file in the `src/` directory and configure `ImportMetaEnv` like this:

Reviewer: Remove contentful
```suggestion
If you would like to have IntelliSense for your environment variables, you can create a `env.d.ts` file in the `src/` directory and configure `ImportMetaEnv` like this:
```

```ts title="src/env.d.ts"
interface ImportMetaEnv {
  readonly HYGRAPH_ENDPOINT: string;
}
```

:::note
Read more about [using environment variables](/en/guides/environment-variables/) and `.env` files in Astro.
:::

Your root directory should now include these new files:

<FileTree title="Project Structure">
- src/
  - **env.d.ts**
- **.env**
- astro.config.mjs
- package.json
</FileTree>

### Fetching data

> Now, Astro components can fetch data from your Hygraph project by using the `HYGRAPH_ENDPOINT`. 
> 
> For example, if you have multiple "blogPosts" content type that has a string field for a title:

Reviewer: I've tried expanding this section a little, to describe what the code is doing.
```suggestion
Fetch data from your Hygraph project by using the `HYGRAPH_ENDPOINT`. 

For example, to fetch entries of a `blogPosts` content type that has a string field `title`, create a GraphQL query to fetch that content. Then, define the type of the content, and set it as the type of the response.
```

```astro title="src/pages/index.astro"
---
interface Post {
	title: string;
}

const query = {
	method: "POST",
	headers: { "Content-Type": "application/json" },
	body: JSON.stringify({
		query: `
      {
        blogPosts {
          title
        }
      }`,
	}),
};

const response = await fetch(import.meta.env.HYGRAPH_ENDPOINT, query);
const json = await response.json();
const posts: Post[] = json.data.blogPosts;
---

<html lang="en">
	<head>
		<meta charset="utf-8" />
		<link rel="icon" type="image/svg+xml" href="/favicon.svg" />
		<meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width" />
		<meta name="generator" content={Astro.generator} />
		<title>Astro</title>
	</head>
	<body>
		<h1>Astro</h1>
		{
			posts.map((post) => (
				<div>
					<h2>{post.title}</h2>
				</div>
			))
		}
	</body>
</html>
```

> ## Deploy

Reviewer: ```suggestion

## Deploy
```

> If your project is using Astro's default static mode, you will need to set up a webhook to trigger a new build when your content changes. If you are using Netlify as your hosting provider, you can use its webhook feature to trigger a new build from Contentful events. 
> 

Reviewer: The next section discusses the netlify integration, so this section from the contentful guide can be removed.
```suggestion
```

### Configuring Netlify Webhook

To set up a webhook in Netlify:

1. Deploy your site to Netlify with [this guide](/en/guides/deploy/netlify/). Remember to add your `HYGRAPH_ENDPOINT` to the enviroment variables.

2. Then Go to your Hygraph project dashboard and click on **Apps**. 

3. Go to the marketplace and search for Netlify and follow the instructions provided.

4. If all went good, now you can deploy your website with a click in the Hygraph interface.

> ## Example repo
> 
> If you  want to see a working example of a Hygraph project with `marked` for markdown parsing, check out [this example repo](https://github.com/camunoz2/example-astrowithhygraph).

Reviewer: We love to showcase community & official resources, so let's reorganise this under "Community Resources" to match our other guides.
```suggestion
## Community Resources

- [Hygraph + Astro example with `marked` for markdown parsing](https://github.com/camunoz2/example-astrowithhygraph)
```

    - **Content API** - For read and write operations. 
    - **High Performance Read-only Content API** - For low latency queries, but no mutations.
    - **Asset Upload API** - For asset uploading from your filesystem. For this to work, you'll a **Permanent Auth Token** with **Mutations**.
    - **Management API** - This API handles all structural elements of a project, which can be utilized through the [Management SDK](https://hygraph.com/features/developer-operations/management-sdk).

4. In this guide we are gonna work with the **High Performance Read-only Content API**

### Setting up the endpoint

To add your Hygraph endpoint to Astro, create an `.env` file in the root of your project with the following variable:

```ini title=".env"
HYGRAPH_ENDPOINT=YOUR_HIGH_PERFORMANCE_API
```

Now, you should be able to use this environment variable in your project. 

If you would like to have IntelliSense for your Contentful environment variables, you can create a `env.d.ts` file in the `src/` directory and configure `ImportMetaEnv` like this:

```ts title="src/env.d.ts"
interface ImportMetaEnv {
  readonly HYGRAPH_ENDPOINT: string;
}

> ```
> :::tip

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

:::tip
```
